    Here bygynneth the Book of the Tales of Caunterbury.
Whan that Aprill with his shoures soote
The droghte of March hath perced to the roote,
And bathed every veyne in swich licour
Of which vertu engendred is the flour;
Whan Zephirus eek with his sweete breeth
Inspired hath in every holt and heeth
The tendre croppes, and the yonge sonne
Hath in the Ram his half cours yronne,
And smale foweles maken melodye,
That slepen al the nyght with open ye
(So priketh hem nature in hir corages),
Thanne longen folk to goon on pilgrimages,
And palmeres for to seken straunge strondes,
To ferne halwes, kowthe in sondry londes;
And specially from every shires ende
Of Engelond to Caunterbury they wende,
1 his: its shoures soote: sweet, fragrant showers
2 droghte: dryness perced: pierced
3 veyne: vein (of the plants) swich licour: such liquid
4 Of which vertu: by which power
5 Zephirus: the west wind (which blows in Spring)
6 Inspired: breathed life into holt and heeth: grove and field
7 croppes: shoots, new leaves yonge: young, because the solar year has just begun with the vernal equinox. The sun has passed through the second half of the zodiacal sign Aries (the Ram); the time is thus late April. April 18 is specified in IntrMLT (II.5).
10 ye: eye
11 priketh hem: spurs, incites them hir corages: their spirits, hearts
13 palmeres: professional pilgrims who had been to the Holy Land and carried a palm frond as their emblem straunge strondes: foreign shores
14 ferne halwes: distant shrines kowthe in sondry londes: known in various lands (i.e., famous)
The hooly blisful martir for to seke,
That hem hath holpen whan that they were seeke.
Bifil that in that seson on a day,
In Southwerk at the Tabard as I lay
Redy to wenden on my pilgrymage
To Caunterbury with ful devout corage,
At nyght was come into that hostelrye
Wel nyne and twenty in a compaignye
Of sondry folk, by aventure yfalle
In felaweshipe, and pilgrimes were they alle,
That toward Caunterbury wolden ryde.
The chambres and the stables weren wyde,
And wel we weren esed atte beste.
And shortly, whan the sonne was to reste,
So hadde I spoken with hem everichon
That I was of hir felaweshipe anon,
And made forward erly for to ryse,
To take oure wey ther as I yow devyse.
17 blisful martir: blessed martyr, St. Thomas à Becket
18 hem hath holpen: helped them seeke: sick
19 Bifil: it happened seson: season
20 Southwerk: Southwark, across the Thames from London Tabard: the Tabard Inn
22 corage: spirit, feelings
25 sondry folk: various sorts of people
25-26 by aventure yfalle In felaweshipe: fallen by chance into fellowship
27 wolden: desired, intended to
28 chambres: bedrooms
29 esed atte beste: accommodated in the best way
30 shortly: in brief
31 everichon: every one
32 anon: straightway
33 forward: agreement
34 devyse: tell
But nathelees, whil I have tyme and space,
Er that I ferther in this tale pace,
Me thynketh it acordaunt to resoun
To telle yow al the condicioun
Of ech of hem, so as it semed me,
And whiche they weren, and of what degree,
And eek in what array that they were inne;
And at a knyght than wol I first bigynne.
A KNYGHT ther was, and that a worthy man,
That fro the tyme that he first bigan
To riden out, he loved chivalrie,
Trouthe and honour, fredom and curteisie.
Ful worthy was he in his lordes werre,
And therto hadde he riden, no man ferre,
As wel in cristendom as in hethenesse,
And evere honoured for his worthynesse;
At Alisaundre he was whan it was wonne.
Ful ofte tyme he hadde the bord bigonne
Aboven alle nacions in Pruce;
In Lettow hadde he reysed and in Ruce,
No Cristen man so ofte of his degree.
In Gernade at the seege eek hadde he be
Of Algezir, and riden in Belmarye.
At Lyeys was he and at Satalye,
Whan they were wonne, and in the Grete See
At many a noble armee hadde he be.
At mortal batailles hadde he been fiftene,
And foughten for oure feith at Tramyssene
In lystes thries, and ay slayn his foo.
35 nathelees: nonetheless space: opportunity
36 pace: go, proceed
37 Me thynketh it: it seems to me, I think it acordaunt to resoun: in accord with proper order
38 condicioun: state, circumstances
39 ech: each (one)
40 degree: social rank
41 array: dress
42 wol: will
45 chivalrie: prowess
46 Trouthe: fidelity honour: good reputation fredom: generosity of spirit curteisie: refinement of manners
47 werre: war
48 ferre: farther
49 hethenesse: heathen lands
51 Alisaundre: Alexandria, The places named in lines 51-66 were places where English knights had campaigned in the fourteenth century.
52 bord bigonne: sat in the place of honor
53 Aboven alle nacions: above knights from all nations Pruce: Prussia
54 Lettow: Lithuania reysed: ridden on raids Ruce: Russia
56 Gernade: Granada seege: siege eek: also be: been
57 Algezir: Algeciras, in Spain Belmarye: Morocco (Benmarin)
58 Lyeys: Ayash (in modern Turkey) Satalye: Atalia (in modern Turkey)
59 Grete See: Mediterranean
60 armee: military expedition
62 Tramyssene: Tlemcen (near Morocco)
63 In lystes: in formal duels ay: always
This ilke worthy knyght hadde been also
Somtyme with the lord of Palatye
Agayn another hethen in Turkye;
And everemoore he hadde a sovereyn prys.
And though that he were worthy, he was wys,
And of his port as meeke as is a mayde.
He nevere yet no vileynye ne sayde
In al his lyf unto no maner wight.
He was a verray, parfit gentil knyght.
But for to tellen yow of his array,
His hors were goode, but he was nat gay.
Of fustian he wered a gypon
Al bismotered with his habergeon,
For he was late ycome from his viage,
And wente for to doon his pilgrymage.
With hym ther was his sone, a yong SQUIER,
A lovyere and a lusty bacheler,
With lokkes crulle as they were leyd in presse.
Of twenty yeer of age he was, I gesse.
Of his stature he was of evene lengthe,
And wonderly delyvere, and of greet strengthe.
And he hadde been somtyme in chyvachie
In Flaundres, in Artoys, and Pycardie,
And born hym weel, as of so litel space,
In hope to stonden in his lady grace.
Embrouded was he, as it were a meede
Al ful of fresshe floures, whyte and reede.
Syngynge he was, or floytynge, al the day;
He was as fressh as is the month of May.
64 ilke: same
65 Somtyme: once, at one time Palatye: Balat (in modern Turkey)
66 Agayn: against
67 sovereyn prys: outstanding reputation
68 Although he was a distinguished knight (i.e., brave), he was prudent.
69 port: bearing, manner
70 vileynye: rudeness
71 no maner wight: any sort of person
72 verray: true parfit: perfect (complete) gentil: noble
73 array: equipment
74 gay: gaily dressed, richly attired
75 fustian: coarse cloth gypon: tunic
76 bismotered with his habergeon: stained by (rust from) his coat of mail
77 viage: journey, expedition
79 Squier: squire, a young knight in the service of another knight
80 lovyere: lover lusty: lively bacheler: young knight, not yet a knight banneret
81 crulle: curled presse: press (curler)
82 yeer: years
83 evene lengthe: moderate height
84 wonderly: marvelously delyvere: agile
85 somtyme: for a time, once in chyvachie: on a cavalry expedition
86 Flaundres, Artoys, Pycardie: Flanders and parts of northern France, where English armies fought
87 born hym weel: conducted himself well space: time
88 stonden in his lady grace: find favor with his lady
89 Embrouded: embroidered meede: meadow
90 reede: red
91 floytynge: piping, playing the flute
Short was his gowne, with sleves longe and wyde.
Wel koude he sitte on hors and faire ryde.
He koude songes make and wel endite,
Juste and eek daunce, and weel purtreye and write.
So hoote he lovede that by nyghtertale
He sleep namoore than dooth a nyghtyngale.
Curteis he was, lowely, and servysable,
And carf biforn his fader at the table.
A YEMAN hadde he and servantz namo
At that tyme, for hym liste ride so,
And he was clad in cote and hood of grene.
A sheef of pecok arwes, bright and kene,
Under his belt he bar ful thriftily
(Wel koude he dresse his takel yemanly;
His arwes drouped noght with fetheres lowe),
And in his hand he baar a myghty bowe.
A not heed hadde he, with a broun visage.
Of wodecraft wel koude he al the usage.
Upon his arm he baar a gay bracer,
And by his syde a swerd and a bokeler,
And on that oother syde a gay daggere
Harneised wel and sharp as point of spere;
A Cristopher on his brest of silver sheene.
An horn he bar, the bawdryk was of grene;
A forster was he, soothly, as I gesse.
Ther was also a Nonne, a PRIORESSE,
That of hir smylyng was ful symple and coy;
Hire gretteste ooth was but by Seinte Loy;
And she was cleped madame Eglentyne.
Ful weel she soong the service dyvyne,
Entuned in hir nose ful semely;
94 koude: knew how to
96 Juste: joust eek: also weel: well purtreye: draw
97 hoote: passionately by nyghtertale: at nighttime
98 sleep: slept
99 lowely: modest (humble) servysable: willing to serve, attentive
100 carf: carved
101 Yeman: yeoman, freeborn servant he: the Knight namo: no other
102 hym liste: he preferred to
105 bar ful thriftily: bore very properly
106 koude: knew how to dresse his takel: care for his arrows, equipment for archery yemanly: skillfully, as a good yeoman should
107 drouped noght with fetheres lowe: did not fall short because of poorly adjusted feathers
109 not heed: close-cropped head broun: very dark
111 gay: bright bracer: archer's arm guard
112 bokeler: buckler, small shield
114 Harneised: ornamented
115 Cristopher: image of St. Christopher sheene: bright
116 bar: bore bawdryk: baldric, shoulder strap for the horn
117 forster: forester, game-keeper
119 ful: very symple and coy: unaffected and quiet
120 ooth: oath Seinte Loy: St. Eligius
121 cleped: called
122 soong: sang service dyvyne: liturgy
123 Entuned: intoned ful semely: in a very seemly manner
And Frenssh she spak ful faire and fetisly,
After the scole of Stratford atte Bowe,
For Frenssh of Parys was to hire unknowe.
At mete wel ytaught was she with alle;
She leet no morsel from hir lippes falle,
Ne wette hir fyngres in hir sauce depe;
Wel koude she carie a morsel and wel kepe
That no drope ne fille upon hire brest.
In curteisie was set ful muchel hir lest.
Hir over-lippe wyped she so clene
That in hir coppe ther was no ferthyng sene
Of grece, whan she dronken hadde hir draughte.
Ful semely after hir mete she raughte.
And sikerly she was of greet desport,
And ful plesaunt, and amyable of port,
And peyned hire to countrefete cheere
Of court, and to been estatlich of manere,
And to ben holden digne of reverence.
But for to speken of hire conscience,
She was so charitable and so pitous
She wolde wepe, if that she saugh a mous
Kaught in a trappe, if it were deed or bledde.
Of smale houndes hadde she that she fedde
With rosted flessh, or milk and wastel-breed.
But soore wepte she if oon of hem were deed,
Or if men smoot it with a yerde smerte;
And al was conscience and tendre herte.
Ful semyly hir wympul pynched was,
Hir nose tretys, hir eyen greye as glas,
Hir mouth ful smal, and therto softe and reed.
124 fetisly: elegantly
125 in the manner of (After the scole of ) Stratford atte Bowe (rather than chat of the royal court)
127 At mete: at dinner with alle: indeed
128 leet: allowed
130 koude: knew how to wel kepe: take good care
131 no drope ne fille: no drop fell
132 Her greatest pleasure (lest) was in good manners (curteisie).
133 over-lippe: upper lip
134 coppe: cup ferthyng: speck (spot the size of a farthing)
135 grece: grease
136 after hir mete she raughte: she reached for her food
137 sikerly: truly greet desport: excellent deportment
138 port: bearing, manner
139 peyned hire: took pains countrefete: imitate
139-40 cheere Of court: the manners of the court
140 estatlich of manere: dignified in behavior
141 digne of reverence: worthy of respect
142 conscience: moral sense and solicitude
143 pitous: compassionate
144 saugh: saw
147 rosted flessh: roasted meat wastel-breed: expensive fine white bread
148 soore: sorely, bitterly
149 smoot: beat yerde: switch smerte: smartly, painfully
151 Ful semyly: very properly wympul: wimple, a head dress that covers all but the face pynched: pleated
152 tretys: well formed greye: gray (?); the exact color intended is uncertain.
153 smal: small, elegant therto: moreover reed: red
But sikerly she hadde a fair forheed;
It was almoost a spanne brood, I trowe;
For, hardily, she was nat undergrowe.
Ful fetys was hir cloke, as I was war.
Of smal coral aboute hire arm she bar
A peire of bedes, gauded al with grene,
And theron heng a brooch of gold ful sheene,
On which ther was first write a crowned A,
And after Amor vincit omnia.
Another NONNE with hire hadde she,
That was hir chapeleyne, and preestes thre.
A MONK ther was, a fair for the maistrie,
An outridere, that lovede venerie,
A manly man, to been an abbot able.
Ful many a deyntee hors hadde he in stable,
And whan he rood, men myghte his brydel heere
Gynglen in a whistlynge wynd als cleere
And eek as loude as dooth the chapel belle
Ther as this lord was kepere of the celle.
The reule of Seint Maure or of Seint Beneit—
By cause that it was old and somdel streit
This ilke Monk leet olde thynges pace,
And heeld after the newe world the space.
He yaf nat of that text a pulled hen,
That seith that hunters ben nat hooly men,
Ne that a monk, whan he is recchelees,
Is likned til a fissh that is waterlees—
This is to seyn, a monk out of his cloystre.
But thilke text heeld he nat worth an oystre;
154 sikerly: certainly
155 spanne brood: about seven to nine inches wide trowe: believe
156 hardily: certainly
157 Ful fetys: very elegant, well made war: aware
159 peire: set gauded: divided by large beads (gaudes) marking the Paternosters
160 sheene: bright
161 crowned A: an A surmounted by a crown
162 Amor vincit omnia: love conquers all; the phrase could apply to either divine or earthly love.
164 chapeleyne: a nun serving as a secretary to a prioress preestes thre: three priests; see n.
165 a fair for the maistrie: an extremely fine or handsome one
166 outridere: monk with business outside the monastery venerie: hunting
167 manly: generous, virile
168 deyntee: fine
169 myghte his brydel heere: could hear his bridle
170 Gynglen: jingle als cleere: as clearly
172 celle: a subordinate monastery
173 reule of Seint Maure or of Seint Beneit: the Benedictine Rule, established by St. Benedict and introduced into France by his follower St. Maurus
174 somdel streit: somewhat narrow, strict
175-76 This same monk let old things pass away (pace) and followed the customs of modern times.
177 yaf: gave text: authoritative written statement pulled: plucked
179 recchelees: heedless of rules
180 til: to waterlees: out of water
182 thilke: that mat worth an oystre: i.e., worth nothing
And I seyde his opinion was good.
What sholde he studie and make hymselven wood,
Upon a book in cloystre alwey to poure,
Or swynken with his handes, and laboure,
As Austyn bit? How shal the world be served?
Lat Austyn have his swynk to hym reserved!
Therfore he was a prikasour aright:
Grehoundes he hadde as swift as fowel in flight;
Of prikyng and of huntyng for the hare
Was al his lust, for no cost wolde he spare.
I seigh his sleves purfiled at the hond
With grys, and that the fyneste of a lond;
And for to festne his hood under his chyn,
He hadde of gold ywroght a ful curious pyn;
A love-knotte in the gretter ende ther was.
His heed was balled, that shoon as any glas,
And eek his face, as he hadde been enoynt.
He was a lord ful fat and in good poynt;
His eyen stepe, and rollynge in his heed,
That stemed as a forneys of a leed;
His bootes souple, his hors in greet estaat.
Now certeinly he was a fair prelaat;
He was nat pale as a forpyned goost.
A fat swan loved he best of any roost.
His palfrey was as broun as is a berye.
A FRERE ther was, a wantowne and a merye,
A lymytour, a ful solempne man.
In alle the ordres foure is noon that kan
So muchel of daliaunce and fair langage.
He hadde maad ful many a mariage
Of yonge wommen at his owene cost.
Unto his ordre he was a noble post.
184 wood: crazy, mad
185 alwey: always poure: pore over
186 swynken: work
187 Austyn: St. Augustine, supposed author of a monastic rule bit = biddeth, commands
189 prikasour: horseman, hunter on horseback aright: certainly
190 Grehoundes: greyhounds
191 prikyng: tracking
192 lust: pleasure
193 seigh: saw purfiled: lined with fur 
194 grys: expensive squirrel fur fyneste of a lond: best to be had
196 curious: skillfully made
197 love-knotte: elaborate knot gretter: larger
198 balled: bald
199 enoynt: anointed, rubbed with oil
200 in good poynt: in good condition
201 stepe: prominent or bright
202 His eyes gleamed like a furnace under a cauldron (R.).
203 souple: pliant greet estaat: excellent condition
204 prelaat: ecclesiastical dignitary
205 forpyned goost: tormented spirit
208 wantowne: jovial, pleasure-loving merye: merry
209 lymytour: friar licensed (by his order) to beg in a specific district solempne: dignified, important
210 ordres foure: the four orders of friars kan: knows
211 muchel: much daliaunce: sociability
214 post: supporter (pillar of the Church)
Ful wel biloved and famulier was he
With frankeleyns over al in his contree,
And eek with worthy wommen of the toun;
For he hadde power of confessioun,
As seyde hymself, moore than a curat,
For of his ordre he was licenciat.
Ful swetely herde he confessioun,
And plesaunt was his absolucioun:
He was an esy man to yeve penaunce,
Ther as he wiste to have a good pitaunce.
For unto a povre ordre for to yive
Is signe that a man is wel yshryve;
For if he yaf, he dorste make avaunt,
He wiste that a man was repentaunt;
For many a man so hard is of his herte,
He may nat wepe, althogh hym soore smerte.
Therfore in stede of wepynge and preyeres
Men moote yeve silver to the povre freres.
His typet was ay farsed ful of knyves
And pynnes, for to yeven faire wyves.
And certeinly he hadde a murye note:
Wel koude he synge and pleyen on a rote;
Of yeddynges he baar outrely the pris.
His nekke whit was as the flour-de-lys;
Therto he strong was as a champioun.
He knew the tavernes wel in every toun
And everich hostiler and tappestere
Bet than a lazar or a beggestere,
For unto swich a worthy man as he
Acorded nat, as by his facultee,
To have with sike lazars aqueyntaunce.
It is nat honest; it may nat avaunce,
For to deelen with no swich poraille,
But al with riche and selleres of vitaille.
216 frankeleyns: landowners over al: everywhere
217 eek: also
220 licenciat: licensed to hear confessions
223 esy: lenient yeve: give
224 wiste: expected pitaunce: gift (literally food allowed to a member of a religious house)
225 povre: poor
226 yshryve: confessed, penitent
227 For if a man gave, jhe (the Friar) dared to assert (R.)
228 wiste: knew
230 may nat: cannot, is not able to hym soore smerte: he sorely, painfully, suffers
232 moote yeve: must give
233 typet: the dangling tip of the hood farsed: stuffed
234 yeven: give
235 murye: merry, pleasing note: voice
236 rote: stringed instrument
237 For reciting ballads (yeddynges), he absolutely (owtrely ) took the prize.
238 flour-de-lys: lily coe
239 champioun: champion, representative in a judicial duel
241 everich: every hostiler: innkeeper tappestere: barmaid
242 Bet: better lazar: leper beggestere: beggar-woman
243 swich: such
244 It was not suitable, in view of his official position.
245 sike: sick
246 honest: honorable, respectable may nat avaunce: cannot be profitable
247 swich poraille: such poor people
248 vitaille: victuals, provisions
And over al, ther as profit sholde arise,
Curteis he was and lowely of servyse;
Ther nas no man nowher so vertuous.
He was the beste beggere in his hous; [And yaf a certeyn ferme for the graunt; Noon of his bretheren cam ther in his haunt;]
For thogh a wydwe hadde noght a sho,
So plesaunt was his "In principio,"
Yet wolde he have a ferthyng, er he wente.
His purchas was wel bettre than his rente.
And rage he koude, as it were right a whelp.
In love-dayes ther koude he muchel help,
For ther he was nat lyk a cloysterer
With a thredbare cope, as is a povre scoler,
But he was lyk a maister or a pope.
Of double worstede was his semycope,
That rounded as a belle out of the presse.
Somwhat he lipsed, for his wantownesse,
To make his Englissh sweete upon his tonge;
And in his harpyng, whan that he hadde songe,
His eyen twynkled in his heed aryght
As doon the sterres in the frosty nyght.
This worthy lymytour was cleped Huberd.
A MARCHANT was ther with a forked berd,
In mottelee, and hye on horse he sat;
Upon his heed a Flaundryssh bever hat,
His bootes clasped faire and fetisly.
His resons he spak ful solempnely,
Sownynge alwey th'encrees of his wynnyng.
He wolde the see were kept for any thyng
Bitwixe Middelburgh and Orewelle.
249 ther as: where
250 lowely of servyse: graciously humble
251 mas = ne was, was not vertuous: capable
252 ferme: fee, fixed payment graunt: grant (of an exclusive territory for begging) haunt: territory
253 sho: shoe
254 In principio: in the beginning (the opening words of Gen. and John 1, popular for devotions)
255 ferthyng: farthing
256 purchas: total income rente: proper income
257 rage: romp, sport (or flirt) whelp: pup
258 love-dayes: days on which disputes were reconciled
260 povre scoler: poor scholar, student
262 double worstede: a very wide (hence expensive) cloth semycope: short cloak
263 rounded: was round presse: casting mold
264 lipsed: lisped wantownesse: affectation
266 songe: sung
267 aryght: exactly
268 sterres: srs
269 cleped: called
271 mottelee: parti-colored cloth hye on horse: in a high saddle
272 Flaundryssh: Flemish
273 fetisly: elegantly, neatly
274 resons: remarks, opinions solempnely: ceremoniously, solemnly
275 Sownynge: concerned with, or, making known wynnyng: profit
276 see: sea kept for any thyng: protected at all costs
277 Middelburgh: a Dutch port Orewelle: Orwell, on the English coast
Wel koude he in eschaunge sheeldes selle.
This worthy man ful wel his wit bisette:
Ther wiste no wight that he was in dette,
So estatly was he of his governaunce
With his bargaynes and with his chevyssaunce.
For sothe he was a worthy man with alle,
But, sooth to seyn, I noot how men hym calle.
A CLERK ther was of Oxenford also,
That unto logyk hadde longe ygo.
As leene was his hors as is a rake,
And he nas nat right fat, I undertake,
But looked holwe, and therto sobrely.
Ful thredbare was his overeste courtepy,
For he hadde geten hym yet no benefice,
Ne was so worldly for to have office.
For hym was levere have at his beddes heed
Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed,
Of Aristotle and his philosophie
Than robes riche, or fithele, or gay sautrie.
But al be that he was a philosophre,
Yet hadde he but litel gold in cofre;
But al that he myghte of his freendes hente,
On bookes and on lernynge he it spente,
And bisily gan for the soules preye
Of hem that yaf hym wherwith to scoleye.
Of studie took he moost cure and moost heede.
Noght o word spak he moore than was neede,
And that was seyd in forme and reverence,
And short and quyk and ful of hy sentence;
Sownynge in moral vertu was his speche,
And gladly wolde he lerne and gladly teche.
278 sheeldes: A sheeld was a unit of exchange; selling shields was a way of borrowing money, often at a cost to the seller.
279 his wit bisette: used his wits
281 estatly: dignified governaunce: behavior, management
282 bargaynes: buying and selling chevyssaunce: financial arrangements, borrowing
283 For sothe: truly with alle: indeed
284 moot = ne woot, do not know
285 Clerk: university student
286 unto logyk hadde longe ygo: had taken (studied) logic a long time
288 right: very undertake: affirm, declare
289 holwe: emaciated sobrely: grave, serious
290 overeste: uppermost courtepy: short coat
291 benefice: ecclesiastical living
292 office: secular employment
293 hym was levere: he would rather his beddes heed: head of his bed
296 fithele: fiddle gay sautrie: elegant psaltry (a harp-like instrument)
297 al be that: even though philosophre: the word can mean either philosopher or alchemist
299 myghte of his freendes hente: could get from his friends
301 gan for the soules preye: did pray, prayed
302 scoleye: attend the schools of the university
303 cure: care
304 o: one neede: necessary
305 in forme and reverence: with due formality and respect (R.)
306 quyk: vivid, lively hy sentence: elevated content
307 Sownynge in: consonant with
A SERGEANT OF THE LAWE, war and wys,
That often hadde been at the Parvys,
Ther was also, ful riche of excellence.
Discreet he was and of greet reverence—
He semed swich, his wordes weren so wise.
Justice he was ful often in assise,
By patente and by pleyn commissioun.
For his science and for his heigh renoun,
Of fees and robes hadde he many oon.
So greet a purchasour was nowher noon:
Al was fee symple to hym in effect;
His purchasyng myghte nat been infect.
Nowher so bisy a man as he ther nas,
And yet he semed bisier than he was.
In termes hadde he caas and doomes alle
That from the tyme of kyng William were falle.
Therto he koude endite and make a thyng,
Ther koude no wight pynche at his writyng;
And every statut koude he pleyn by rote.
He rood but hoomly in a medlee cote,
Girt with a ceint of silk, with barres smale;
Of his array telle I no lenger tale.
A FRANKELEYN was in his compaignye.
Whit was his berd as is the dayesye;
Of his complexioun he was sangwyn.
Wel loved he by the morwe a sop in wyn;
To lyven in delit was evere his wone,
For he was Epicurus owene sone,
309 Sergeant of the Lawe: a lawyer who belonged to the highest order in his profession war: prudent
310 Parvys: the porch of St. Paul's Cathedral
311 ful riche of excellence: well endowed with superior qualities
312 Discreet he was and of greet reverence: judicious and with much dignity
314 Justice: judge assise: the court of assizes
315 patente: letter of appointment from the king pleyn commissioun: full jurisdiction
316 science: knowledge
317 fees and robes: grants of yearly income (a legal formula) many oon: many a one
318 purchasour: land-buyer
319 fee symple: unrestricted possession
320 been infect: be invalidated
323-24 He had in Year Books all the cases (caas) and judicial decisions (doomes) from the time of William I.
325 endite and make a thyng: draft and draw up a legal document
326 pynche at: find a flaw in
327 And he knew every statute entirely by heart.
328 hoomly: simply medlee: parti-colored
329 Girt: encircled ceint: belt barres: stripes
330 array: dress
331 Frankeleyn: landowner
332 dayesye: daisy
333 complexioun: temperament, balance of the body's fluids, the four "humors"—blood, phlegm, red or yellow bile (choler), black bile (melancholy) sangwyn: of the sanguine humor (dominated by blood)
334 sop in wyn: piece of bread in wine
335 delit: delight, pleasure wone: custom, wont
336 Epicurus owene sone: an Epicurean
That heeld opinioun that pleyn delit
Was verray felicitee parfit.
An housholdere, and that a greet, was he;
Seint Julian he was in his contree.
His breed, his ale, was alweys after oon;
A bettre envyned man was nowher noon.
Withoute bake mete was nevere his hous,
Of fissh and flessh, and that so plentevous
It snewed in his hous of mete and drynke;
Of alle deyntees that men koude thynke,
After the sondry sesons of the yeer,
So chaunged he his mete and his soper.
Ful many a fat partrich hadde he in muwe,
And many a breem and many a luce in stuwe.
Wo was his cook but if his sauce were
Poynaunt and sharp, and redy al his geere.
His table dormant in his halle alway
Stood redy covered al the longe day.
At sessiouns ther was he lord and sire;
Ful ofte tyme he was knyght of the shire.
An anlaas and a gipser al of silk
Heeng at his girdel, whit as morne milk.
A shirreve hadde he been, and a contour.
Was nowher swich a worthy vavasour.
AN HABERDASSHERE and a CARPENTER,
A WEBBE, a DYERE, and a TAPYCER—
And they were clothed alle in o lyveree
Of a solempne and a greet fraternitee.
Ful fressh and newe hir geere apiked was;
Hir knyves were chaped noght with bras
But al with silver, wroght ful clene and weel,
337 That: who pleyn delit: pure pleasure
338 verray felicitee parfit: true perfect happiness
340 Seint Julian: patron saint of hospitality
341 after oon: of the same (good) quality
342 envyned: stocked with wine
343 bake mete: pie of meat, fowl, or fish
344 plentevous: plenteous
345 snewed: snowed
346 deyntees: fine food and drink
347 After the sondry sesons: according to the various seasons. Seasonal adjustment of the diet was a health measure.
349 partrich: partridge muwe: pen for birds
350 breem: bream (a freshwater fish) luce: pike stuwe: fish pond
351 but if: unless
352 Poynaunt: spicy, piercing geere: utensils
353 table dormant: table permanently in place (rather than taken down between meals)
355 He presided at court sessions.
356 knyght of the shire: member of Parliament
357 anlaas: broad, two-edged dagger gipser: purse
359 shirreve: sheriff contour: auditor
360 vavasour: feudal landholder
361 Haberdasshere: a dealer in hats or small wares
362 Webbe: weaver Tapycer: weaver of tapestries, rugs, etc.
363 o lyveree: one livery, distinctive dress worn by members of a guild 
364 solempne: dignified, important fraternitee: parish guild
365 geere: equipment apiked: trimmed, adorned
366 chaped: mounted
Hire girdles and hir pouches everydeel.
Wel semed ech of hem a fair burgeys
To sitten in a yeldehalle on a deys.
Everich, for the wisdom that he kan,
Was shaply for to been an alderman.
For catel hadde they ynogh and rente,
And eek hir wyves wolde it wel assente;
And elles certeyn were they to blame.
It is ful fair to been ycleped "madame,"
And goon to vigilies al bifore,
And have a mantel roialliche ybore.
A COOK they hadde with hem for the nones
To boille the chiknes with the marybones,
And poudre-marchant tart and galyngale.
Wel koude he knowe a draughte of Londoun ale.
He koude rooste, and sethe, and broille, and frye,
Maken mortreux, and wel bake a pye.
But greet harm was it, as it thoughte me,
That on his shyne a mormal hadde he.
For blankmanger, that made he with the beste.
A SHIPMAN was ther, wonynge fer by weste;
For aught I woot, he was of Dertemouthe.
He rood upon a rouncy, as he kouthe,
In a gowne of faldyng to the knee.
A daggere hangynge on a laas hadde he
Aboute his nekke, under his arm adoun.
The hoote somer hadde maad his hewe al broun;
And certeinly he was a good felawe.
Ful many a draughte of wyn had he ydrawe
368 girdles: belts pouches: purses everydeel: every bit
369 ech: each (one) burgeys: citizen of a city (tradesman)
370 yeldehalle: guildhall deys: dais
371 kan: knows
372 shaply: suitable, fit alderman: city official
373 catel: property rente: income
375 elles: otherwise
376 ycleped "madame,": called "my lady"
377 vigilies: vigils, feasts held on the eve of a holy day al bifore: in front of everyone, heading the procession
378 roialliche ybore: royally carried
379 for the nones: for the occasion; see n.
380 chiknes: chickens marybones: marrow bones
381 poudre-marchant tart: a tart spice galyngale: powdered aromatic root used as a sweet spice
383 sethe: simmer
384 mortreux: stews or hashes
385 harm: pity it thoughte me: it seemed to me
386 mormal: ulcer; see n.
387 blankmanger: a thick stew or mousse of chopped chicken or fish boiled with rice with the beste: excellently
388 wonynge: dwelling fer by weste: far in the west
389 For aught I woot: for all I know Dertemouthe: Dartmouth, in Devon, in the south west
390 rouncy: carthorse, nag as he kouthe: as best he could
391 faldyng: coarse woolen cloth
392 laas: cord
393 under his arm adoun: down under his arm
395 good felawe: good companion; see n.
Fro Burdeux-ward, whil that the chapman sleep.
Of nyce conscience took he no keep.
If that he faught and hadde the hyer hond,
By water he sente hem hoom to every lond.
But of his craft to rekene wel his tydes,
His stremes, and his daungers hym bisides,
His herberwe, and his moone, his lodemenage,
Ther nas noon swich from Hulle to Cartage.
Hardy he was and wys to undertake;
With many a tempest hadde his berd been shake.
He knew alle the havenes, as they were,
Fro Gootlond to the cape of Fynystere,
And every cryke in Britaigne and in Spayne.
His barge ycleped was the Maudelayne.
With us ther was a DOCTOUR OF PHISIK;
In al this world ne was ther noon hym lik,
To speke of phisik and of surgerye,
For he was grounded in astronomye.
He kepte his pacient a ful greet deel
In houres by his magyk natureel.
Wel koude he fortunen the ascendent
Of his ymages for his pacient.
He knew the cause of everich maladye,
Were it of hoot, or coold, or moyste, or drye,
And where they engendred, and of what humour.
He was a verray, parfit praktisour:
The cause yknowe, and of his harm the roote,
Anon he yaf the sike man his boote.
Ful redy hadde he his apothecaries
To sende hym drogges and his letuaries,
For ech of hem made oother for to wynne—
397 Burdeux-ward: the direction of Bordeaux chapman: merchant sleep: slept
398 nyce: scrupulous took he no keep: he took no notice
399 If that: if the hyer hond: the upper hand
401 craft to rekene: skill to reckon
402 stremes: currents daungers hym bisides: perils near at hand
403 herberwe: harbors, anchorages; see n. moone: positions of the moon lodemenage: skill in navigation
404 Hulle: Hull, on the Yorkshire Coast Cartage: Carthage, Tunisia, or Cartagena, Spain
405 wys to undertake: prudent in his undertakings
408 Gootlond to the cape of Fynystere: Probably Gotland and Cape Finistere
409 cryke: inlet Britaigne: Brittany
410 barge: sailing vessel; see n.
411 Phisik: medicine
414 grounded: instructed astronomye: the science of astrology; see n.
416 houres: astronomical hours magyk natureel: science
417 fortunen the ascendent: calculate the planetary position
418 ymages: talismatic figures in astrology
420 hoot, coold, moyste, drye: one of the elemental qualities; see n.
421 humour: kind of bodily fluid
422 verray: true parfit: perfect, complete praktisour: practitioner
424 Anon: at once boote: remedy
426 drogges: drugs letuaries: electuaries, medicinal mixtures
427 ech: each (one) wynne: profit
Hir frendshipe nas nat newe to bigynne.
Wel knew he the olde Esculapius,
And Deyscorides, and eek Rufus,
Olde Ypocras, Haly, and Galyen,
Serapion, Razis, and Avycen,
Averrois, Damascien, and Constantyn,
Bernard, and Gatesden, and Gilbertyn.
Of his diete mesurable was he,
For it was of no superfluitee,
But of greet norissyng and digestible.
His studie was but litel on the Bible.
In sangwyn and in pers he clad was al,
Lyned with taffata and with sendal.
And yet he was but esy of dispence;
He kepte that he wan in pestilence.
For gold in phisik is a cordial,
Therefore he lovede gold in special.
A good WIF was ther OF biside BATHE,
But she was somdel deef, and that was scathe.
Of clooth-makyng she hadde swich an haunt
She passed hem of Ypres and of Gaunt.
In al the parisshe wif ne was ther noon
That to the offrynge bifore hire sholde goon;
And if ther dide, certeyn so wrooth was she
That she was out of alle charitee.
Hir coverchiefs ful fyne weren of ground;
I dorste swere they weyeden ten pound
That on a Sonday weren upon hir heed.
Hir hosen weren of fyn scarlet reed,
Ful streite yteyd, and shoes ful moyste and newe.
Boold was hir face, and fair, and reed of hewe.
She was a worthy womman al hir lyve:
Housbondes at chirche dore she hadde fyve,
Withouten oother compaignye in youthe—
428 newe to bigynne: recently begun
429-34 The physician knows the standard medical authorities, from the Greeks (Aesculapius) to the contemporary English Gilbertus Anglicus; see n.
435 mesurable: moderate
439 sangwyn: red pers: blue or bluish gray
440 taffiata, sendal: varieties of silk
441 but esy of dispence: moderate in (careful about) spending
442 wan: gained
443 cordial: medicine for the heart
444 in special: in particular
446 somdel deef: somewhat deaf that was scathe: that was a pity. See WBPro 111.668.
447 haunt: skill
448 Ypres, Gaunt: Ypres, Ghent, cloth-making centers in modern Belgium
450 offrynge: offering (when the people go to the altar with their offerings at Mass)
451 wrooth: angry
452 out of alle charitee: deeply upset
453 coverchiefs: linen coverings for the head fyme weren of ground: were fine in texture
454 dorste swere: dare swear weyeden: weighed
456 hosen: stockings
457 streite yteyd: closely laced moyste: supple
460 chirche dore: door of the church
461 Withouten: not counting; see n.
But thereof nedeth nat to speke as nowthe.
And thries hadde she been at Jerusalem;
She hadde passed many a straunge strem;
At Rome she hadde been, and at Boloigne,
In Galice at Seint-Jame, and at Coloigne.
She koude muchel of wandrynge by the weye.
Gat-tothed was she, soothly for to seye.
Upon an amblere esily she sat,
Ywympled wel, and on hir heed an hat
As brood as is a bokeler or a targe;
A foot-mantel aboute hir hipes large,
And on hir feet a paire of spores sharpe.
In felaweshipe wel koude she laughe and carpe.
Of remedies of love she knew per chaunce,
For she koude of that art the olde daunce.
A good man was ther of religioun,
And was a povre PERSOUN OF A TOUN,
But riche he was of hooly thoght and werk.
He was also a lerned man, a clerk,
That Cristes gospel trewely wolde preche;
His parisshens devoutly wolde he teche.
Benygne he was, and wonder diligent,
And in adversitee ful pacient,
And swich he was ypreved ofte sithes.
Ful looth were hym to cursen for his tithes,
But rather wolde he yeven, out of doute,
Unto his povre parisshens aboute
Of his offryng and eek of his substaunce.
He koude in litel thyng have suffisaunce.
Wyd was his parisshe, and houses fer asonder,
But he ne lefte nat, for reyn ne thonder,
In siknesse nor in meschief to visite
462 as nowthe: now
463-66 Jerusalem, Rome, Boloigne (Boulogne in France), in Galice at Seint-Jame (St. James of Compostella in Galicia, Spain), and Coloigne (Cologne) were celebrated places of pilgrimage.
464 straunge strem: foreign sea
468 Gat-tothed: with teeth set wide apart (R.)
469 amblere: a pacing horse esily: comfortably
470 Ywympled wel: wearing a large wimple, a head dress that covers all but the face
471 brood as is a bokeler or a targe: broad as a buckler or shield
472 foot-mantel: an apron-like overskirt
473 spores: spurs
474 carpe: chatter
475 remedies of love: remedies for love-sickness per chaunce: as it happened
476 olde daunce: tricks of the trade, game of love
478 povre Persoun: poor parson
482 parisshens: parishioners
483 Benygne: gracious
485 ypreved: proven ofte sithes: many times
486 He was very reluctant (Ful looth) to excommunicate (cursen) those who did not pay the tithes (one-tenth of their income) legally due their priest.
489 offryng: voluntary offerings of the people at Mass substaunce: fixed income (from property of the Church)
491 asonder: apart
492 ne lefte nat: did not omit
493 meschief: trouble
The ferreste in his parisshe, muche and lite,
Upon his feet, and in his hand a staf.
This noble ensample to his sheep he yaf,
That first he wroghte, and afterward he taughte.
Out of the gospel he tho wordes caughte,
And this figure he added eek therto,
That if gold ruste, what shal iren do?
For if a preest be foul, on whom we truste,
No wonder is a lewed man to ruste;
And shame it is, if a prest take keep,
A shiten shepherde and a clene sheep.
Wel oghte a preest ensample for to yive,
By his clennesse, how that his sheep sholde lyve.
He sette nat his benefice to hyre
And leet his sheep encombred in the myre
And ran to Londoun unto Seinte Poules
To seken hym a chaunterie for soules,
Or with a bretherhed to been withholde;
But dwelte at hoom, and kepte wel his folde,
So that the wolf ne made it nat myscarie;
He was a shepherde and noght a mercenarie.
And though he hooly were and vertuous,
He was to synful men nat despitous,
Ne of his speche daungerous ne digne,
But in his techyng discreet and benygne.
To drawen folk to hevene by fairnesse,
By good ensample, this was his bisynesse.
But it were any persone obstinat,
What so he were, of heigh or lough estat,
Hym wolde he snybben sharply for the nonys.
A bettre preest I trowe that nowher noon ys.
He waited after no pompe and reverence,
Ne maked him a spiced conscience,
494 ferreste: those farthest away muche and lite: great and small, everyone
496 ensample: model
498 tho: those
499 figure: metaphor
501 foul: evil
502 lewed man: uneducated man, layman
503 take keep: is concerned
504 shiten: defiled, foul
506 clennesse: purity
507 sette nat his benefice to hyre: did not farm out
508 leet: left encombred: stuck
509 Seinte Poules: St. Paul's Cathedral
510 chaunterie: appointment as a chantry priest, co serve in a chapel endowed for prayers for the soul of its patron
511 bretherhed to been withholde: to be retained, hired, as its chaplain by a guild
513 myscarie: go wrong
516 despitous: scornful
517 daungerous: domineering digne: haughty
518 discreet: courteous
519 fairnesse: graciousness, kindness
522 heigh or lough estat: high or low rank
523 snybben: rebuke for the nonys: then, at that time
524 trowe: believe
525 waited after: expected reverence: ceremony
526 spiced: over-fastidious; see n.
But Cristes loore and his apostles twelve
He taughte; but first he folwed it hymselve.
With hym ther was a PLOWMAN, was his brother,
That hadde ylad of dong ful many a fother;
A trewe swynkere and a good was he,
Lyvynge in pees and parfit charitee.
God loved he best with al his hoole herte
At alle tymes, thogh him gamed or smerte,
And thanne his neighebor right as hymselve.
He wolde thresshe, and therto dyke and delve,
For Cristes sake, for every povre wight,
Withouten hire, if it lay in his myght.
His tithes payde he ful faire and wel,
Bothe of his propre swynk and his catel.
In a tabard he rood upon a mere.
Ther was also a REVE, and a MILLERE,
A SOMNOUR, and a PARDONER also,
A MAUNCIPLE, and myself—ther were namo.
The MILLERE was a stout carl for the nones;
Ful byg he was of brawn, and eek of bones.
That proved wel, for over al ther he cam,
At wrastlynge he wolde have alwey the ram.
He was short-sholdred, brood, a thikke knarre;
Ther was no dore that he nolde heve of harre,
Or breke it at a rennyng with his heed.
His berd as any sowe or fox was reed,
And therto brood, as though it were a spade.
Upon the cop right of his nose he hade
A werte, and theron stood a toft of herys,
Reed as the brustles of a sowes erys;
His nosethirles blake were and wyde.
A swerd and a bokeler bar he by his syde.
530 Who had hauled (ylad) full many a cartload (fother) of dung (dong)
531 swynkere: worker
532 pees: peace
534 thogh him gamed or smerte: whether it pleased or pained him
535 right as: exactly as
536 therto: moreover dyke and delve: make ditches and dig
537 wight: person
538 hire: payment myght: power
540 propre swynk: own labor catel: possessions
541 tabard: workman's loose, sleeveless outer garment mere: mare
544 namo: no others
545 carl: fellow for the nones: indecd
546 byg: strong brawn: muscle
547 over al: wherever
548 have alwey the ram: always win the ram (given as a prize)
549 short-sholdred: stoudy built (with a thick neck) cthikke knarre: stout fellow
550 nolde = 1 wolde, would not heve of harre: lift off its hinges
551 at a rennyng: by running against it
554 cop: top
555 werte: wart coft of herys: tuft of hairs
556 brustles: bristles sowes erys: sow's ears
557 nosethirles: nostrils
His mouth as greet was as a greet forneys.
He was a janglere and a goliardeys,
And that was moost of synne and harlotries.
Wel koude he stelen corn and tollen thries;
And yet he hadde a thombe of gold, pardee.
A whit cote and a blew hood wered he.
A baggepipe wel koude he blowe and sowne,
And therwithal he broghte us out of towne.
A gentil MAUNCIPLE was ther of a temple,
Of which achatours myghte take exemple
For to be wise in byynge of vitaille;
For wheither that he payde or took by taille,
Algate he wayted so in his achaat
That he was ay biforn and in good staat.
Now is nat that of God a ful fair grace
That swich a lewed mannes wit shal pace
The wisdom of an heep of lerned men?
Of maistres hadde he mo than thries ten,
That weren of lawe expert and curious,
Of which ther were a duszeyne in that hous
Worthy to been stywardes of rente and lond
Of any lord that is in Engelond,
To make hym lyve by his propre good
In honour dettelees (but if he were wood),
Or lyve as scarsly as hym list desire;
And able for to helpen al a shire
In any caas that myghte falle or happe.
And yet this Manciple sette hir aller cappe.
The REVE was a sclendre colerik man.
His berd was shave as ny as ever he kan;
559 greet forneys: large cauldron
560 janglere: a teller of dirty stories goliardeys: buffoon
561 harlotries: deeds of harlotry, obscenities
562 stelen corn: steal grain tollen thries: take toll (payment) three times
563 thombe of gold: golden thumb; an ironic reference to a proverb, with the implication that there are no honest millers Pardee: indeed
564 blew: blue
565 sowne: play
567 Maunciple was ther of a temple: business agent, purchaser of provisions for a temple, an Inn of Court (school of law)
568 achatours: buyers myghte: could
569 byynge of vitaille: purchase of victuals, provisions
570 by taille: on credit
571 Algate: always wayted so in his achaat: watched so carefully (for his opportunity) in his purchases
572 ay biforn: always ahead
574 lewed: uneducated pace: surpass
576 mo: more
577 curious: skillful
578 duszeyne: dozen
579 stywardes: stewards rente: income
581 propre good: own wealth
582 dettelees: without debts but if he were wood: unless he was crazy
583 as scarsly as hym list desire: as economically as he pleased
585 Caas: case, circumstances happe: occur by chance
586 sette hir aller cappe: deceived them all
587 Reve: reeve, manager of an estate or farm sclendre: lean colerik: dominated by the humor choler
588 ny: close kan: can
His heer was by his erys ful round yshorn;
His top was dokked lyk a preest biforn.
Ful longe were his legges and ful lene,
Ylyk a staf; ther was no calf ysene.
Wel koude he kepe a gerner and a bynne;
Ther was noon auditour koude on him wynne.
Wel wiste he by the droghte and by the reyn
The yeldynge of his seed and of his greyn.
His lordes sheep, his neet, his dayerye,
His swyn, his hors, his stoor, and his pultrye
Was hoolly in this Reves governynge,
And by his covenant yaf the rekenynge,
Syn that his lord was twenty yeer of age.
Ther koude no man brynge hym in arrerage.
Ther nas baillif, ne hierde, nor oother hyne,
That he ne knew his sleighte and his covyne;
They were adrad of hym as of the deeth.
His wonyng was ful faire upon an heeth;
With grene trees yshadwed was his place.
He koude bettre than his lord, purchace.
Ful riche he was astored pryvely.
His lord wel koude he plesen subtilly,
To yeve and lene hym of his owene good,
And have a thank, and yet a cote and hood.
In youthe he hadde lerned a good myster:
He was a wel good wrighte, a carpenter.
This Reve sat upon a ful good stot
That was al pomely grey and highte Scot.
A long surcote of pers upon he hade,
And by his syde he baar a rusty blade.
Of Northfolk was this Reve of which I telle,
Biside a toun men clepen Baldeswelle.
Tukked he was as is a frere aboute,
589 erys: ears round yshorn: closely cropped
590 top: top of his head dokked: cut short biforn: in the front
592 Ylyk a staf: like a stick
593 gerner: granary bynne: bin (for storing grain)
594 on him wynne: earn anything (by catching him out)
597 neet: cattle dayerye: herd of dairy cattle
598 hors: horses stoor: livestock pultrye: poultry
600 covenant: agreement, contract
601 Syn that: since yeer: years
602 arrerage: arrears
603 mas = ne was, was not baillif: manager of a farm hierde: herdsman hyne: servant
604 sleighte: trickery covyne: treachery
605 adrad: afraid the deeth: the plague (?); see n.
606 wonyng: dwelling
608 purchace: buy property
609 riche: richly astored: provided pryvely: secretly
610-12 He could please his lord by lending him some of his (the lord's) own possessions (i.e., what he had stolen from him) and thus obtain thanks and a reward besides (R.).
613 myster: craft
615 stot: horse
616 pomely: dapple highte: was called
617 surcote: outer coat pers: dark blue
620 clepen: call
621 Tukked he was as is a frere: having his long coat hitched up and held by a girdle (R.), like a friar
And evere he rood the hyndreste of oure route.
A SOMONOUR was ther with us in that place,
That hadde a fyr-reed cherubynnes face,
For saucefleem he was, with eyen narwe.
As hoot he was and lecherous as a sparwe,
With scalled browes blake and piled berd.
Of his visage children were aferd.
Ther nas quyk-silver, lytarge, ne brymstoon,
Boras, ceruce, ne oille of tartre noon,
Ne oynement that wolde clense and byte,
That hym myghte helpen of his whelkes white,
Nor of the knobbes sittynge on his chekes.
Wel loved he garleek, oynons, and eek lekes,
And for to drynken strong wyn, reed as blood;
Thanne wolde he speke and crie as he were wood.
And whan that he wel dronken hadde the wyn,
Thanne wolde he speke no word but Latyn.
A fewe termes hadde he, two or thre,
That he had lerned out of som decree— —
No wonder is, he herde it al the day;
And eek ye knowen wel how that a jay
Kan clepen "Watte" as wel as kan the pope.
But whoso koude in oother thyng hym grope,
Thanne hadde he spent al his philosophie;
Ay "Questio quid iuris" wolde he crie.
He was a gentil harlot and a kynde;
A bettre felawe sholde men noght fynde.
He wolde suffre for a quart of wyn
A good felawe to have his concubyn
A twelf month, and excuse hym atte fulle;
Ful prively a fynch eek koude he pulle.
622 hyndreste: last route: company
623 Somonour: a server of summonses for an ecclesiastical court
624 fyr-reed: fire-red cherubynnes: cherubs
625 saucefleem: pimpled eyen narwe: swollen eyelids
627 scalled: infected with the scall, a skin disease; cf. Adam piled: with hair fallen out
629-30 Mercury, lead monoxide (lytarge), sulphur (brymstoon), borax (boras), white lead (ceruce), and cream of tartar were all used in medicine.
631 oynement: ointment byte: burn
632 whelkes: pimples, pustules
633 knobbes: swellings
634 garleek, oynons, lekes: garlic, onions, leeks
636 wood: crazy
639 termes: technical terms
640 decree: decretal, text of ecclesiastical law
643 clepen "Watte": say "Walter"
644 grope: examine
644-45 But anyone who knew how co test him further found that to be the extent of his learning.
646 Questio quid iuris: The question is, wha.t point of the law (applies)?
647 harlot: buffoon, jester
649 suffre: allow
651 atte fulle: completely
652 Secretly (discreetly) he also knew how to pluck a finch (trick or swindle someone).
And if he foond owher a good felawe,
He wolde techen him to have noon awe
In swich caas of the ercedekenes curs,
But if a mannes soule were in his purs;
For in his purs he sholde ypunysshed be.
"Purs is the ercedekenes helle," seyde he.
But wel I woot he lyed right in dede;
Of cursyng oghte ech gilty man him drede,
For curs wol slee right as assoillyng savith,
And also war hym of a Significavit.
In daunger hadde he at his owene gise
The yonge girles of the diocise,
And knew hir conseil, and was al hir reed.
A gerland hadde he set upon his heed,
As greet as it were for an ale-stake.
A bokeleer hadde he maad hym of a cake.
With hym ther rood a gentil PARDONER
Of Rouncivale, his freend and his compeer,
That streight was comen fro the court of Rome.
Ful loude he soong "Com hider, love, to me!"
This Somonour bar to hym a stif burdoun;
Was nevere trompe of half so greet a soun.
This Pardoner hadde heer as yelow as wex,
But smothe it heeng as dooth a strike of flex;
By ounces henge his lokkes that he hadde,
And therwith he his shuldres overspradde;
But thynne it lay, by colpons oon and oon.
But hood, for jolitee, wered he noon,
For it was trussed up in his walet.
Hym thoughte he rood al of the newe jet;
Dischevelee, save his cappe, he rood al bare.
653 owher: anywhere
655 Caas: case, circumstances ercedekenes curs: excommunication
656 But if: unless
659 woot: know
660 cursyng: archdeacon's curse, excommunication him drede: be afraid
661 wol slee: will slay assoillyng: absolution
662 war hym: let him beware Significavit: order for imprisonment
663 In daunger: in (his) control at his owene gise: as he pleased
664 girles: young women or young people
665 conseil: secrets al hir reed: adviser of them all
666 gerland: wreath
667 ale-stake: sign of an alehouse
668 cake: loaf of bread
669 Pardoner: a seller of indulgences
670 Rouncivale: a hospital at Charing Cross compeer: companion
671 court of Rome: papal court
672 "Com hider, love, to me!": Probably the refrain of a popular song
673 stif burdoun: strong bass
674 trompe: trumpet soun: sound
675 heer: hair wex: wax
676 strike: clump, hank flex: flax
677 ounces: small strands
679 colpons: strands oon and oon: one by one
680 for jolitee: to make an attractive appearance
681 trussed: packed walet: pouch, knapsack
682 Hym thoughte: it seemed to him, he thought al of the newe jet: in the very latest fashion
683 Dischevelee: with hair unbound, hanging loose save: save for, except
Swiche glarynge eyen hadde he as an hare.
A vernycle hadde he sowed upon his cappe.
His walet, biforn hym in his lappe,
Bretful of pardoun comen from Rome al hoot.
A voys he hadde as smal as hath a goot.
No berd hadde he, ne nevere sholde have;
As smothe it was as it were late shave.
I trowe he were a geldyng or a mare.
But of his craft, fro Berwyk into Ware
Ne was ther swich another pardoner.
For in his male he hadde a pilwe-beer,
Which that he seyde was Oure Lady veyl;
He seyde he hadde a gobet of the seyl
That Seint Peter hadde, whan that he wente
Upon the see, til Jhesu Crist hym hente.
He hadde a croys of latoun ful of stones,
And in a glas he hadde pigges bones.
But with thise relikes, whan that he fond
A povre person dwellynge upon lond,
Upon a day he gat hym moore moneye
Than that the person gat in monthes tweye;
And thus, with feyned flaterye and japes,
He made the person and the peple his apes.
But trewely to tellen atte laste,
He was in chirche a noble ecclesiaste.
Wel koude he rede a lessoun or a storie,
But alderbest he song an offertorie;
For wel he wiste, whan that song was songe,
He moste preche and wel affile his tonge
To wynne silver, as he ful wel koude;
Therefore he song the murierly and loude.
Now have I toold you soothly, in a clause,
Th'estaat, th'array, the nombre, and eek the cause
684 glarynge eyen: staring eyes
685 vernycle: Veronica, a reproduction of St. Veronica's cloth, bearing the imprint of Christ's face; a badge of the pilgrimage to Rome sowed: sewn
686 walet: pouch, knapsack lappe: large pocket (in a fold of his clothing)
687 Bretful: brimful pardoun: papal indulgences
688 voys: voice smal: high goot: goat
691 trowe: believe geldyng or a mare: a eunuch or a homosexual
692 fro Berwyk into Ware: from one end of England to the other
694 male: pouch, bag pilwe-beer: pillow-case
695 Oure Lady veyl: Our Lady's veil
696 gobet of the seyl: piece of the sail
698 see: sea til: until hente: took
699 croys: cross latoun: a brass-like alloy
702 person: parson upon lond: in the countryside
703 gat hym: got himself
704 tweye: two
705 japes: tricks
706 He made fools (apes ) of the parson and the people.
707 atte laste: at the last, finally
709 lessoun, storie: liturgical texts, often from the Bible, read during Mass
710 alderbest: best of all offertorie: Offertory (said or sung when offerings are made at Mass)
712 affile his tonge: smooth his speech
714 song: sang murierly: more merrily
715 in a clause: briefly
Why that assembled was this compaignye
In Southwerk at this gentil hostelrye
That highte the Tabard, faste by the Belle.
But now is tyme to yow for to telle
How that we baren us that ilke nyght,
Whan we were in that hostelrie alyght;
And after wol I telle of our viage
And al the remenaunt of oure pilgrimage.
But first I pray yow, of youre curteisye,
That ye n'arette it nat my vileynye,
Thogh that I pleynly speke in this mateere,
To telle yow hir wordes and hir cheere,
Ne thogh I speke hir wordes proprely.
For this ye knowen al so wel as I:
Whoso shal telle a tale after a man,
He moot reherce as ny as evere he kan
Everich a word, if it be in his charge,
Al speke he never so rudeliche and large,
Or ellis he moot telle his tale untrewe,
Or feyne thyng, or fynde wordes newe.
He may nat spare, althogh he were his brother;
He moot as wel seye o word as another.
Crist spak hymself ful brode in hooly writ,
And wel ye woot no vileynye is it.
Eek Plato seith, whoso kan hym rede,
The wordes moote be cosyn to the dede.
Also I prey yow to foryeve it me,
Al have I nat set folk in hir degree
Heere in this tale, as that they sholde stonde.
My wit is short, ye may wel understonde.
Greet chiere made oure Hoost us everichon,
And to the soper sette he us anon.
He served us with vitaille at the beste;
Strong was the wyn, and wel to drynke us leste.
A semely man OURE HOOSTE was withalle
For to been a marchal in an halle.
719 faste by: close to Belle: a tavern
721 baren us: behaved ilke: same
722 alyght: arrived
723 wol: will viage: journey
726 n'arette it mat: do not attribute it to vileynye: rudeness
728 cheere: behavior
730 al so: as
731 Whoso: whoever shal: must
732 moot reherce: must repeat ny: close kan: knows how
733 Everich a: every in his charge: his responsibility
734 Al speke he: although he may speak rudeliche: ignorantly, crudely large: freely
735 moot: must untrewe: inaccurately
736 feyne thyng: make up things
738 o: one
739 brode: plainly
740 woot: know vileynye: rudeness
741 kan hym rede: knows how to interpret him
742 cosyn: cousin, closely related
744 Al: although degree: social rank
746 may: can
747 Greet chiere: good cheer us everichon: every one of us
749 vitaille: victuals, provisions at the beste: of the best sort
750 wel to drynke us leste: we were well pleased to drink
751 semely: seemly, impressive withalle: indeed
752 marchal: master of ceremonies
A large man he was with eyen stepe—
A fairer burgeys was ther noon in Chepe—
Boold of his speche, and wys, and wel ytaught,
And of manhod hym lakkede right naught.
Eek therto he was right a myrie man;
And after soper pleyen he bigan,
And spak of myrthe amonges othere thynges,
Whan that we hadde maad oure rekenynges,
And seyde thus: ‘‘Now, lordynges, trewely,
Ye been to me right welcome, hertely;
For by my trouthe, if that I shal nat lye,
I saugh nat this yeer so myrie a compaignye
Atones in this herberwe as is now.
Fayn wolde I doon yow myrthe, wiste I how.
And of a myrthe I am right now bythoght,
To doon yow ese, and it shal coste noght.
"Ye goon to Caunterbury—God yow speede,
The blisful martir quite yow youre meede!
And wel I woot, as ye goon by the weye,
Ye shapen yow to talen and to pleye;
For trewely, confort ne myrthe is noon
To ride by the weye doumb as a stoon;
And therfore wol I maken yow disport,
As I seyde erst, and doon yow som confort.
And if yow liketh alle by oon assent
For to stonden at my juggement,
And for to werken as I shal yow seye,
Tomorwe, whan ye riden by the weye,
Now, by my fader soule that is deed,
But ye be myrie, I wol yeve yow myn heed!
Hoold up youre hondes, withouten moore speche."
Oure conseil was nat longe for to seche.
Us thoughte it was noght worth to make it wys,
And graunted hym withouten moore avys,
753 eyen stepe: bright or large eyes; see n.
754 burgeys: citizen of a city (tradesman) Chepe: Cheapside
756 manhod: manliness, qualities proper to a good man right naught: nothing at all
758 pleyen: to play, provide amusement
760 maad oure rekenynges: paid our bills
763 trouthe: faith
764 saugh: saw
765 Atones: at one time herberwe: lodging
766 Fayn: gladly doon yow myrthe: make you happy wiste I: if I knew
767 am right now bythoght: have thought
768 doon yow ese: give you pleasure
769 yow speede: give you success
770 quite yow youre meede: give you your reward
772 shapen yow: you intend talen: tell tales pleye: amuse yourselves
776 erst: before
777 yow liketh alle: it pleases all of you by oon assent: unanimously
779 werken: do
781 Now by the soul of my father, who is dead
782 But ye be: unless you are, if you are not
784 conseil: decision mat longe for to seche: i.e., ready at hand
785 worth: worthwhile make it wys: deliberate on it, raise difficulties
786 avys: discussion
And bad him seye his voirdit as hym leste.
"Lordynges," quod he, "now herkneth for the beste;
But taak it nought, I prey yow, in desdeyn.
This is the poynt, to speken short and pleyn,
That ech of yow, to shorte with oure weye,
In this viage shal telle tales tweye
To Caunterbury-ward, I mene it so,
And homward he shal tellen othere two,
Of aventures that whilom han bifalle.
And which of yow that bereth hym best of alle—
That is to seyn, that telleth in this caas
Tales of best sentence and moost solaas—
Shal have a soper at oure aller cost
Heere in this place, sittynge by this post,
Whan that we come agayn fro Caunterbury.
And for to make yow the moore mury,
I wol myselven goodly with yow ryde,
Right at myn owene cost, and be youre gyde;
And whoso wole my juggement withseye
Shal paye al that we spenden by the weye.
And if ye vouche sauf that it be so,
Tel me anon, withouten wordes mo,
And I wol erly shape me therfore."
This thyng was graunted, and oure othes swore
With ful glad herte, and preyden hym also
That he wolde vouche sauf for to do so,
And that he wolde been oure governour,
And of oure tales juge and reportour,
And sette a soper at a certeyn pris,
And we wol reuled been at his devys
In heigh and lough; and thus by oon assent
We been acorded to his juggement.
And therupon the wyn was fet anon;
We dronken, and to reste wente echon,
Withouten any lenger taryynge.
787 voirdit: verdict
788 quod: said for the beste: the best course of action
790 short and pleyn: clearly and briefly
791 to shorte with: in order (with which) to shorten
792 shal: must tweye: two
794 othere two: two others
795 whilom: once, in former times han bifalle: have happened
796 bereth hym best: does best
798 sentence: meaning, significance solaas: pleasure
799 at oure aller cost: at the cost of all of us
803 goodly: gladly
804 gyde: guide
805 withseye: gainsay
806 Shal: must
807 vouche sauf: grant, agree
808 anon: straightway mo: more
809 shape me: get ready
811 preyden: The understood subject is "we."
814 juge: judge reportour: record keeper
815 pris: price
816 at his devys: as he wishes
817 In heigh and lough: in every respect by oon assent: unanimously
819 fet: fetched
820 echon: each one
Amorwe, whan that day bigan to sprynge,
Up roos oure Hoost, and was oure aller cok,
And gadrede us togidre alle in a flok,
And forth we riden a litel moore than paas
Unto the Wateryng of Seint Thomas;
And there oure Hoost bigan his hors areste
And seyde, "Lordynges, herkneth, if yow leste.
Ye woot youre foreward, and I it yow recorde.
If even-song and morwe-song accorde,
Lat se now who shal telle the firste tale.
As evere mote I drynke wyn or ale,
Whoso be rebel to my juggement
Shal paye for al that by the wey is spent.
Now draweth cut, er that we ferrer twynne;
He which that hath the shorteste shal bigynne.
Sire Knyght," quod he, "my mayster and my lord,
Now draweth cut, for that is myn accord.
Cometh neer," quod he, "my lady Prioresse.
And ye, sire Clerk, lat be youre shamefastnesse,
Ne studieth noght; ley hond to, every man!"
Anon to drawen every wight bigan,
And shortly for to tellen as it was,
Were it by aventure, or sort, or cas,
The sothe is this: the cut fil to the Knyght,
Of which ful blithe and glad was every wyght,
And telle he moste his tale, as was resoun,
By foreward and by composicioun,
As ye han herd; what nedeth wordes mo?
And whan this goode man saugh that it was so,
As he that wys was and obedient
To kepe his foreward by his free assent,
He seyde, "Syn I shal bigynne the game,
What, welcome be the cut, a Goddes name!
Now lat us ryde, and herkneth what! seye."
And with that word we ryden forth oure weye,
And he bigan with right a myrie cheere
His tale anon, and seyde as ye may heere.
823 oure aller cok: rooster of us all (awakened us all)
825 paas: walk, the slowest gait of a horse
826 the Wateryng of Seint Thomas: a brook about two miles from London
827 areste: stop
828 if yow leste: if you please
829 foreward: agreement recorde: recall, bring to mind
830 Thar is, if you still agree this morning with what you said last night.
832 mote: may
835 draweth cut: draw lots ferrer twynne: depart further (from London)
838 accord: decision
839 neer: nearer
840 lat be: leave of shamefastnesse: modesty
844 aventure, or sort, or cas: chance, luck, or destiny
845 sothe: truth
847 resoun: reasonable, just
848 composicioun: agreement
853 Syn: since shal: must
854 a: in
857 cheere: expression